Hello everyone! In this lesson, we will work with the state machines in an animated blueprint
and program the jumping mechanics of our character.
We start with the bind key, which will be responsible for the jump. Go to project settings,
to the input category.
This time we create a discrete mapping - action mapping.
The jump will be carried out by pressing the key that we will set.
We call mapping - Jump.
Assign the spacebar key.
Let's go to visual studio. Let's program the jump logic.
Let's create a bind for jump.
To do this, copy the pointer to the PlayerInputComponent.
For this type of bind, we use the BindAction function of the input component class.
The first argument to the function is the name of bind, the second argument is the state of the control at which the
callback will be called. Enter IE_Pressed. The next argument is the same as for all other bind - it is
a pointer to the current instance of the object. We use this as usual and the last argument is the function
that will be called when clicked. Here we were lucky again. The function that is responsible for the physics of the jump is
already implemented in the pawn class. It is called jump. We will call it when the space bar is pressed.
If we press f12, we will see that the bPressedJump flag is set in this function.
And in accordance with this variable, an impulse to our actor along the z axis will be added to the next Tick. Launch editor.
Let's start the game, let's press the space bar.
Our character receives an impulse, finds himself in the air and returns to the ground under the influence of gravity.
Fine. The jump works, that is, we have the code part ready.
Let's go to the animation blueprint and set up the jump animation.
Let's create a boolean variable in the blueprint that will determine if
our character is in the air or not. Cast the pawn pointer to character.
If you double-click on the blueprint thread, you can get an additional bullet that
allows you to align the nodes using Bezier curves. So, we made a cast.
And to the class of the main character. We don't need to convert the pointer to BaseCharacter.
All the information you need is already in character. Enter falling and take out the IsFalling variable,
which is located in the character movement component. The value of this variable is true
when the character is in the air and false when on the ground. Click on promote to variable.
Create a variable, call it the same - IsFalling and use it in the animation graph,
that is, this is another shared variable between two graphs. Let's go to the animation graph.
In the output pose, only one animation, our blend space, is currently served. Let's see how you can add
jump animation here . We need a specialized node called the state machine.
This node allows you to manage multiple animations in an animation blueprint and customize the transitions between them.
Let's call our state machine locomotion. She will be responsible for
various animations of the movement of our character and connect it to the output pose. We double-click on the state
machine. In the opened graph, we see only one node, it is called entry point. This is the starting
point of our state machine. We pull out the arrow from entry, in the window that opens, select the Add State item.
We call our state Walk.
Double click on the walk node. Inside the graph, we notice that the output value is also Animation Pose.
Therefore, we return to the very top of the anim graph. Let's take our blend space from here. Press Ctrl-X.
We insert it into the walk node and connect the blend space to the output animation pose.
We compile our animated blueprint. We launch the project. We check that we have not broken anything.
All animations remained in place. More precisely, our one running animation.
We have reorganized our animated blueprint using the state machine and now we will continue to work with it.
Let's see what jump animations we have. Go to the asset browser. Find the jump start animation here.
This animation will only play once, when the character starts his jump.
After playing the initial animation, the jump loop animation starts. It plays
all the time while the character is in the air. And as soon as the character is on the ground, the
jump end animation plays once . Let's start combining animation data in our state machine.
We return to the animation graph of the state of the car and all our animation assets can be dragged into this graph.
They will be automatically encapsulated into states. Therefore, we throw out jump start, jump end, jump loop.
Let's start setting up the logic of our state machine. We take out the arrow from the walk state and connect it to the jump start.
At the top of the arrow, we see that a bullet has been automatically created - this is a transition rule.
That is, the condition for the transition from the walk state to the jump start state. The transition rule calculates the boolean value of the variable,
at which the transition from one state to another is carried out.
As you might guess, this is where we connect our IsFalling variable. If, during the movement, the character finds himself in the air,
then we carry out the transition from walk to jump start and at the end of the jump start animation, the character animation
should go to the jump loop animation. Let's write down the condition under which this transition
will be made. To do this, we will use a special function called time remaining.
We drop this node onto the graph. In brackets, we display a hint that this
function will be calculated for the jump start animation. This function returns the number of seconds
left in the animation. Our condition for the transition in the jump loop will be that we check the given
time, that it is less than a certain epsilon, let's say 0.1 seconds. This means that the jump start animation is almost over.
As soon as this condition becomes true, we go from jump start to jump loop and stay
in the jump loop until the value of the IsFalling variable becomes false. We calculate the logical NOT
over the given variable and pass it to result. And the final transition that remains for us to make is
from the jump end state to the walk state. In this condition, we check in a similar way that the jump end animation
comes to an end. We compare the remaining time of the jump end with our epsilon 0.1 and feed it to result.
So, we have programmed our first state machine to
transition from a run state to a jump state. Also notice that we don't have any condition between entry and walk,
because the entry element is purely decorative. Compile blueprint. We launch the project.
Press the space bar. The character is in the air. The jump begins and the character is on the ground.
Also note that he twitches somehow unpleasantly. Let's fix this.
We return to the state machine. Let's fall into jump start. Click on our jump start animation and in the details panel,
notice that the animation has a property loop animation. It is set to true by default.
Let's remove this, because the jump start animation for us should play only once.
The jump loop animation should play in a loop, so we check that this property is true.
In the jump end, we also set this property to false. Compile. We launch the project. Press the space bar.
We got rid of the twitching. The animations work smoothly and the jump also works when running.
Let's take a closer look at how the jump loop animation works.
To do this, go to the modes window. Select geometry and drop the geometry of the linear stairs.
Increase the number of steps in brush settings, let it be 45.
Press play. Let's climb up the stairs.
We are at the very top of the stairs. Let's jump off. The jump loop animation works and the
jump end animation works on landing . This can also be checked by jumping off our platform.
We will be in the air forever and the jump loop animation will play continuously.
The last point in this lecture: let's open our character.
We select the component of motion and in the search we find the value that is responsible for the height of our jump.
It's called JumpZVelocity. By default it is equal to 420. Let's set some big value, for example 2420. Press
play. We press the spacebar and our character goes flying.
Thus, by controlling the value of this variable, we can influence the impulse that the character receives when jumping.
We can create various trampolines. Apply superpower to our character under certain
circumstances, and so on. I will put this value on default, and this is the end of the lecture.